# Fermat's Last Margin
A tool for annotating research papers (and more) and sharing those annotations (via git for starters)

[Fermat's Last Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fermat%27s_Last_Theorem) was captioned "I have a truly marvelous demonstration of this proposition which this margin is too narrow to contain."

This tool intends to be an infinite margin.

# WHY WOULD I USE THIS?

Do you read many research papers or PhD theses? If yes, you might want to use this tool!

I like to write in the margins of my books and printed research papers.
I want to read what other people have to say about a paper after I write down my own notes.
I want to be able to search my notes. I want to be able to share my notes!
I want to be able to remember why I downloaded a paper years later.

## Why are notes separate from the paper itself?

Distributing PDFs will get you sued for lots of money ( https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sci-Hub#United_States ). I don't want to get sued.

## Getting Started
* install [poppler-utils](https://poppler.freedesktop.org/), or more specifically, make sure the pdftocairo binary from poppler-utils is in your `$PATH`
* git clone this repository
* run this from cabal `cabal run`
* point your web browser to `localhost:3000`

All of the annotations are saved in a local directory `~/.fermatslastmargin/localuser` and your friend's annotations are saved in `~/.fermatslastmargin/friends/<github_name_of_friend>`
### nix shell
    `nix-shell shell.nix --command "git apply ./nix/gitub.patch && cabal run"`
    When you done for nix-shell, don't forget to revert patch(this patch just
    ensure you can run ``nix-shell` correctly). 
# Features
- [X] add paper info
- [X] read/write annotations
- [X] load page images
- [X] render 'uploaded' PDF to page images
- [X] push to github repo
- [X] pull from friends' github repo
- [X] switch notes view to see github friends' notes
- [X] setup new user (ask for github OAuth and username, set git remote correctly)
- [X] search crossref.org by title to get DOI
- [X] update PDF when viewing paper
- [ ] plugin system to download paper (as PDF) when given unique ID (DOI for now)
- [ ] search arxiv by title to get DOI
- [ ] swap to github v4 graphql API so pulling friend repos doesn't get rate limited

# Dependencies
- git
- poppler-utils (apt install poppler-utils)
- zlib (apt install zlib1g-dev)
## Dependencies when building from source
- cabal 2.4 - if you get "cabal: fermatslastmargin.cabal:14: Parse of field 'build-depends' failed." you need to upgrade with "cabal install Cabal"
- GHC 8.6 (at least, that's all I've tried)

## Mac
- brew install poppler
- brew install zlib

# Project Implementation

[Scotty](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/scotty) is used to handle a bunch of HTTP endpoints.

All state is saved in `~/.fermatslastmargin/`. For the user viewing the papers, their state will be in `~/.fermatslastmargin/localuser`.

The notes for each paper will be in `~/.fermatslastmargin/localuser/$DOI/paper.json`.
For example, Conor McBride's paper "Everybody's Got to be Somewhere" has a DOI of `10.4204/EPTCS.275.6`.
Once that paper is added, the notes will be saved into `~/.fermatslastmargin/localuser/10.4204/EPTCS.275.6/paper.json`

Notes written by users followed by this user will be in `~/.fermatslastmargin/friends/<github_name_of_friend>`

When a PDF is uploaded to create a new paper, the PDF is saved into `~/.fermatslastmargin/pageimages/$DOI/paper.pdf`.
Next, page images are generated by poppler-utils into `~/.fermatslastmargin/pageimages/$DOI/page-1.png` up to however many pages in the PDF.

# Front End code

The front end uses jquery in a thoroughly haphazard manner.

The state is mostly passed around as GET parameters for DOI, page number, and friend name.
For example, `http://localhost:3000/index.html?pagenum=1&uid=10.2168/LMCS-10(3:19)2014&friendview=chazzam`

The front end javascript calls HTTP endpoints defined in Main.hs.
- page images are fetched from the filesystem via a static endpoint
- local and friend notes are fetched by GET'ing from `/getannotate`
- a new or updated note is saved by posting to `/annotate`
- friends are found by GET'ing the DOI from `/friends?paperuid=DOI`
- pushing local notes to github GETs `/gitpush`
- pulling remote notes from github GETs `/gitpull`
- creating a new paper POSTs to `/paper`
- creating a new user will hit `/newuser`
